Add a page on the experiments (#46)
freespek/ssf-mc: EXPERIMENTS.md

which is known to have significant variations in running times. Therefore,
instead of taking the time figures on this page literally, consider them as
estimates such as "minutes", "hours", or "days".

**Software**. We are using the symbolic model checker [Apalache][] for
TLA<sup>+</sup>. Check the Apalache [installation instructions][Apalache
installation] in the manual. For reproducibility, we recommend using the latest
release in the 0.45.x series. See [Apalache releases][]. The experiments were
run on Ubuntu Server 24.04.

In this document, we provide commands for running each experiment in a single
thread. We also have an experimental setup that runs individual experiments on
multiple CPU cores. If you are curious about this setup, please contact us.

## 2. Input specifications

<!-- TODO: this section should go into a separate high-level document in the
future -->

We have produced the following specifications in the project:
 
 - **Spec 1**. This is the specification [spec/ffg_recursive.tla][]. It is the
 result of a manual mechanical translation of the original executable
 specification in Python, which can be found in [ffg.py]. This specification is

>  using mutually recursive operators, which are not supported by Apalache.  As a

Reviewer: I would add a link to https://apalache-mc.org/docs/apalache/principles/recursive.html

 result, we are not checking this specification.

 - **Spec 2**. This is the specification [spec/ffg.tla][]. It is a manual
 adaptation of `Spec 1`. The main difference between `Spec 2` and `Spec 1` is

>  that `Spec 2` uses "folds" (also known as "reduce") instead of recursion. We

Reviewer: I would add a link to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fold_(higher-order_function)

 expect `Spec 2` to be equivalent to `Spec 1`, although we do not have a formal
 proof of this equivalence. This specification has high model-checking

>  complexity, roughly speaking, as it contains multiple nested folds.

Reviewer: Spec 2 introduces folds *and* precomputes.

Maybe we should separate the vanilla fold-based spec and the one with precomputes into separate specs 2a and 2b?

> This specification has high model-checking complexity, roughly speaking, as it contains multiple nested folds.

Nested folding is somewhat alliviated by the precomputes.

Author: as far as I understand, we have implemented precomputes on top of Spec 2, so we do not have a version without precomputes to show?

Reviewer: Not really. It would be pretty easy to separate them, precomputes were introduced as alternative operators. 

But since Apalache just goes OOM even with 20G, there's not much practical sense in having the non-precompute spec in the repo.

Reviewer: In any case, I think we changed this paragraph enough to cover both variants.

 
 - **Spec 3**. This is the specification [abstract-spec/ffg.tla][]. It is a
 manual abstraction of `Spec 2` that is highly optimized for constraint solving,
 especially with Apalache. In addition to that, Spec 3 describes a state machine

>  that adds blocks and votes in every step.

Reviewer: Should we highlight that adding a state machine enables BMC?

fix the specification parameters to small values for model checking purposes,
e.g.:

 - four validators,
 - from 4 to 10 slots,
 - up to 12 votes.

By using small values for the parameters, we are able to produce counterexamples
in a reasonable time when such examples exist. By increasing the parameter
values, we can increase our confidence in the specification and its properties.
While this restriction to small parameter values is dictated by the practicality
of our approach, it is informally supported by the "small scope hypothesis,"
which was popularized by tools such as [Alloy][].

## 3. All figures in one place

The following table summarizes the experimental figures in one place:

| Experiment | Specification | Property   | Time    | Memory |
|-----------:|---------------|------------|---------|--------|
| 4.1        | `Spec 2`      | Row 1      | TBD     | TBD    |
| 5.1        | `Spec 3`      | Row 2      | TBD     | TBD    |
| 5.2        | `Spec 3`      | Row 3      | TBD     | TBD    |
| 6.1        | `Spec 4`      | Row 4      | TBD     | TBD    |
| 6.2        | `Spec 4`      | Row 5      | TBD     | TBD    |

## 4. Model checking Spec 2

> <!-- TODO: Thomas, please add a description of the experiments with MC_ffg_examples.tla -->

Reviewer: 👍 I will do so in a follow-up PR.

Reviewer: Actually, doing it in this PR :D

### 4.1. Bounded model checking of Accountable Safety

In this experiment, we are checking whether Accountable Safety holds true for
`Spec 2`. Since `Spec 2` presents a snapshot of a single validator and does not
make any steps, we have to check this property only in the initial states.

```sh
$ cd ./spec
$ JVM_ARGS=-Xmx20G apalache-mc check --length=0 \
  --inv=AccountableSafety MC_ffg.tla
```

> Note that we have to extend the default JVM heap size from 4G to 20G.

Reviewer: I'm surprised that you had to do that.
Is it really necessary? I only did it before I added precomputes.

Author: yeah, I think it ran out of 4G on my machine, 20G is probably overshooting

Since `Spec 2` has high complexity, this experiment takes long. **TODO:** how
long.

## 5. Model checking Spec 3

### 5.1. Bounded model checking of Accountable Safety

In this experiment, we are checking whether Accountable Safety holds true for up
to 10 steps of `Spec 3`. Since `Spec 3` specifies the abstract state machine of
a single validator (alternatively, the network view), we have to check
executions up to some bound.

```sh
$ cd ./abstract-spec

> $ JVM_ARGS=-Xmx20G apalache-mc check --inv=AccountableSafety MC_ffg.tla

Reviewer: You also need `20G` here?

Author: you need more than 4G. I just set 20G by default now

Reviewer: confirmed

```

This experiment takes about **TODO**.

### 5.2. Randomized symbolic execution for accountable safety

To obtain results faster, albeit at the cost of completeness, we analyze 100
random symbolic runs, each consisting of up to 10 steps:

```sh
$ cd ./abstract-spec

> $ JVM_ARGS=-Xmx20G apalache-mc simulate \

Reviewer: You also need `20G` here?

  simulate --max-run=100 --length=10 --timeout-smt=10800 \
  --inv=AccountableSafety MC_ffg.tla
```

In addition, we bound the running time of individual SMT queries to 3 hours. If
the timeout is reached, the query is skipped. This command typically finds
counterexamples much quicker than `check`. Therefore, when `simulate` does not

> find counterexamples, it gives us relatively good confidence that the property

Reviewer: ```suggestion
find counterexamples, it gives us relatively high confidence that the property
```

holds true.

This experiment takes about **TODO** on a single node. The interesting thing is

> that we can parallelize the enumeration of 100 runs across multiple cores. For
> instance, we try 5 symbolic runs on 20 CPU cores.

Reviewer: There is some qualifier missing in the last sentence. Maybe @Kukovec has a better idea.

```suggestion
that we can parallelize the enumeration of 100 runs across multiple cores. For
instance, we use 20 CPU cores to check 5 symbolic runs each.
```

## 6. Induction checking Spec 4

### 6.1. Inductiveness check

In this experiment, we show that `Inv0` is an inductive invariant for `Spec 3`:

```sh

> $ apalache-mc check --length=1 --inv=Inv0 \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cd ./abstract-spec
$ apalache-mc check --length=1 --inv=Inv0 \
```

  --init=Init0 --next=Next0 MC_ffg.tla
```

This experiment takes about **TODO**.

### 6.2. Inductive checking of Accountable Safety

```sh
$ cd ./abstract-spec

> $ JVM_ARGS=-Xmx20G ~/devl/apalache/bin/apalache-mc check \

Reviewer: `JVM_ARGS=-Xmx20G` pops up?
